this medical director of NHS England I'd
like first to update you on the facts
about the spread of the corona virus
then I will outline why it is so
critical that we continue to observe the
rules on social distancing thirdly I'll
explain what we're doing to increase the
capacity of the NHS to deal with this
disease and finally I want to say
something about how we can all work
together to defeat this invisible enemy
first the facts as they stand today
as of 9 a.m. today a total of 183
thousand 190 people have been tested of
which 40 1903 tested positive 15,000 and
73 people in England have been admitted
to hospital with coffered 19 symptoms
but the pattern of hospital admissions
in England and Wales has regional
differences in London the number of
admissions fell slightly between the
first and second of April admissions are
steady in Wales but in Yorkshire and the
Northeast they've gone up by 35% and in
the Midlands the rate of hospital
admissions has gone up by 47% 708 people
have sadly lost their lives as a result
of covered 19 the highest daily total
yet recorded and that means that of
those hospitalized in the UK the number
who've passed away now totals 4313 those
numbers emphasize again the importance
of maintaining social distancing
measures to halt the spread of the
disease more than ever
we must stick with it as the Prime
Minister said in his video message now I
know that life under lockdown can be
challenging when some will be tempted on
this sunny weekend to venture out and
about but as the health secretary
underlined yesterday if we relax our
adherence to the rules we increase the
risk for others that's why it's so
important to stay at home to protect the
NHS and to save lives we need to think
of those on the front line
the sacrifices that they're making for
us as the chief nursing officer for
England reminded us yesterday
Ruth Mae asked us to remember to NHS
nurses who died after contracting
covered 19 ARIMA nesrin who was just 36
and Amy O'Rourke aged 39 each had three
young children they died while doing
everything they could to help the sick
and the suffering we can all best honor
them by playing our part in fighting the
disease by staying at home and slowing
the spread 7 health care professionals
have now lost their life to cover 19 and
we offer our heartfelt condolences to
their grieving families and to the many
others mourning a loss of loved ones
they include the family of Ismail
Muhammad Abdul Wahab who died aged 13 in
King's College Hospital in London his
mother and siblings are showing symptoms
of the virus and they were unable to say
their final goodbyes at his funeral in
their despair the loving dignified
tributes from his Maya's parents a truly
haunting our thoughts today are all sit
with the family of the five-year-old
child with underlying health conditions
whose tragically died so again you must
stay at home to protect the NHS and to
save lives
whatever the temptations this weekend
please don't go outside to visit the
lakes the beaches the countryside take
pride instead in keeping your own
families and communities safe the more
we restrict contact the more we slow the
spread of the infection the more time we
have to build capacity in the NHS so
that we can treat those who are most in
need I want now to outline how we're
increasing NHS capacity yesterday we
were grateful to His Royal Highness the
Prince of Wales himself recently
recovered from coronavirus for opening
the brand-new Nightingale hospital in
East London a testament to brilliant
teamwork and determined leadership from
the NHS two weeks of hard work have
transformed a convention hall into a
fully functioning field hospital that
can treat 500 covered 19 patients on
ventilators or through oxygenation new
Nightingale hospitals are due to be
built in Birmingham
Bristol Cardiff Belfast Glasgow
Harrogate and Manchester and given that
we know that the Midlands are a
particular area of concern the NHS and
the military are accelerating their
existing work to transform the National
Exhibition Centre in Birmingham into a
2,000 bed Nightingale hospital I spoken
to the mayor of the West Midlands and E
Street earlier today and he's doing all
he can with the NHS to accelerate that
work of course a critical part of
ensuring the NHS is resilient is
improving the testing of staff ten
thousand nine hundred and eighty four
tests were administered yesterday and as
the health secretary outlined on
Thursday we have a strategy to increase
that number to one hundred thousand a
day testing is a critical part of the
clinical pathway that we all follow in
seeking to reduce the impact of covered
nineteen but the next vital step is
appropriate pharmaceutical treatment
that is why as the health secretary
explained clinical trials are now taking
place to see if antivirals which have
helped in the fight against HIV and anti
malarial medicines such as -
hydroxychloroquine can reliably reduce
the harm that the corona virus inflicts
the next stage in the clinical pathway
is ensuring that those patients with
impaired lung functions get the oxygen
they need and this is where ventilation
comes in we've been working to increase
the ventilator capacity across the NHS
ventilation can be non-invasive and
invasive effective non-invasive
ventilation can ensure patients do not
need to be placed on invasive event
ledges where they're intubated and
supported to breathe with machinery
which takes oxygen Direct into their
lungs we've secured new non-invasive
capacity with help of UK manufacturers
who've worked at pace to develop new
technologies a team from University
College London working with
mercedes-benz have produced a new device
which has been clinically approved they
produced 250 yesterday would produce the
same number today and tomorrow rising to
1,000 a day next week were also
increasing the capacity of the NHS to
deploy invasive ventilation we've been
buying invasive ventilators from
partners abroad including Germany and
Switzerland and today 300 new
ventilators arrived from China I'd like
to thank the Chinese government for
their support in securing that capacity
and we've developed new sources of
supply here in the UK with existing and
modified models being made in greater
numbers and new models designed to
cons-stream soon the first bottles which
have been scaled up as part of the
ventilator challenge will be coming off
production lines this weekend
more to come into operation in the
coming weeks subject to safety and
regulatory approvals as part of the
prime minister's call to manufacturers
to scale up production increasing this
production has involved securing
supplies of critical components from
lithium-ion batteries to flow regulators
from across the globe to assemble here
the first of the ventilators that the
government has ordered from Pen lon
a medical devices company based in
Oxfordshire will begin arriving in
hospitals this week for final clinical
checks we're grateful to the mo D
personnel who will be delivering them as
we are to all the companies who devoted
time staff and resources to fighting
coffin 19 the first devices from Smith's
group have also been received at MOT
Donington a military logistics hub in
Shropshire these have been approved by
the regulator the initial dispatch is
the result of scaled up manufacturing of
an existing mechanical ventilator design
and we're grateful for the efforts of an
industry consortium including GE at GKN
aerospace and rolls-royce these
ventilators will be distributed to
hospitals this week and next week UK
production of another ventilator device
from the company's die America and
plexus will start at their Factory in
Kelso in Scotland the design is based on
an existing product already in use in
the NHS the more ventilators invasive
and non-invasive available to the NHS
the more patients can get the care they
need when they need it but the process
of design testing assembly and
manufacture does take time we need to
make sure that these devices are safe
and their manufacture scalable the
challenges in increasing numbers are
formidable which is why the commitment
of the scientists engineers designers
and so
servants involved in this work is so
impressive but you don't need to be a
scientist or engineer to help them all
you need to do is to observe the social
distancing guidelines that have been put
in place the more we all stay at home
and slow the spread of the disease the
more time we buy for more ventilators to
come on stream and for the NHS to become
more resilient finally I want to turn to
the way in which all parts of our
country are coming together to fight
this invisible enemy teachers have kept
schools open for those who need them and
parents have kept their children at home
were ever possible so we end to the
Easter holiday weeks with school
attendance having been around just 2%
ensuring that the most vulnerable can be
cared for for children eligible for free
school meals vouchers will be available
over the holidays to support household
incomes but unconcious that more must be
done particularly over the holiday
period to support children at risk and
in need and we'll be seeing more next
week about work in this area I also
recognize that we're asking a lot of the
British people and we in government
therefore have a responsibility to
communicate as clearly as possible clear
factual timely information and an honest
assessment of the difficulties that we
all face as well as proper recognition
of the achievements of those on the
front line who are doing so much to
fight this disease adapting to this
pandemic has meant developing guidance
implementing new policies and
coordinating efforts across government
at an unprecedented pace inevitably
there has therefore been criticism of
some government actions I recognize that
that criticism has been designed to
challenge government's performance and
to improve our response which is why I
welcome it even as we unite in our
efforts to defeat the virus we must also
recognize that robust scrutiny is to be
welcomed it's the duty of the media
which is why we're acting to both share
robust information and support our media
by investing more in our government
information campaign which is being
disseminated through the national media
and local newspapers and radio will
share essential health advice and
information on the support packages
which are available from the chancellor
for workers and businesses we'll share
details of how you can help to volunteer
to support our NHS or help the
vulnerable and also how you can help our
great British farmers by buying more
locally grown products will also list
other ways in which you can join the
national effort against the coronavirus
we're also using social media in
particular to reach young people some of
whom have been more reluctant than
others to follow social distancing rules
and in this united national effort where
we need both constructive challenge and
a shared spirit of national endeavor we
want to make sure that we all work
collaboratively to help defeat the virus
that's wrong we've been coordinating
daily with our colleagues in the
devolved administration's while I spoke
yesterday to my friends in the trade
union movement Francis O'Grady and Len
McCluskey and one of the Prime Minister
has written today to the leaders of all
opposition parties including the new
leader of the Labour Party Sakir stormer
I'd like to congratulate sukira on his
victory and wish him well in his
important role I'd also like to
emphasize once more that all of us can
do our bit this weekend in that united
national effort by staying at home
protecting the NHS and saving lives and
now I'll hand over to Steve thank you
very much well as you all now know the
key to getting on top to beating this
virus is to reduce contact with each
other to stay at home and to stop the
spread of the virus and as the first
chart this afternoon shows that we are
continuing to see people adhering to
those instructions transport use in
particular public transport use remains
extremely low and it's absolutely
critical as you just heard that
everybody follows those instructions so
the Sun might be out but that doesn't
mean you should be out we all need to
make sure that we resist the temptation
whatever the weather to disregard the
instructions that are so clear
we need to stop the social contact
reduce social contact stop transmission
and reduce spread of the virus and by
doing that we will start to protect the
NHS and to save lives and as the next
chart shows the new cases in the UK have
continued to rise but in the last few
days they have stabilized now it's
really important as I've said before not
to read too much into a day or a few
days data but if we do reduce social
contact we know from the scientific
evidence we know from the experience of
other countries that we will see a
reduction in affection rates a reduction
infection rates as the next chart shows
means a reduction in hospitalization
rates for the vast majority of people
this is a mild moderate illness a bit
like a cold or flu but for a small
number of people it does mean that the
symptoms are severe enough to require
hospitalization it will be a week or two
before the measures that are put in
place translate into lower
hospitalization rates but as you can see
in London in the last few days there has
been a bit of a plateauing in terms of
numbers now in other parts of the
country as you've just heard
hospitalizations are still going up so
this is not the time to be complacent
and to take our foot off the pedal we
need to continue to comply with those
instructions because that will translate
in the next week or two into a reduction
in hospital missions and of course
finally as the next chart shows
unfortunately and with great sadness the
number of des continues to be high and
as I and others have said unfortunately
that is likely to continue over the next
week or two until we get on top and stop
this virus and by doing that we will see
a reduction in the number of deaths
thank you very much Steve I will now
turn to our colleagues in the media for
some questions and first of all we're
Chatterjee from ITV Riya hi this is a
question for you Michael Gove professor
Niall Ferguson and
leading scientist advising the
government has warned that their covert
19 infection rate in the UK could remain
high for weeks and weeks the weather is
nice this weekend people will be tempted
to go out people will go out what is the
government planning to do to make sure
people stay at home because some people
watching this broadcast will be asking
if words are enough well thank you very
much for your question I hope that I and
certainly Steve have been clear when we
look at the at the death rate when we
look at the number of increasing
fatalities when we consider the pressure
on our NHS everyone has to ask
themselves the question what am i doing
in order to relieve pressure on the NHS
how am i helping in the shared national
effort all of us have loved ones all of
us have relatives who are at risk as a
result of the spread of this disease if
we want them to be safe then we want the
NHS to be as resilient as possible and
that means observing these guidelines I
know that lockdown is challenging I know
it's very difficult particularly you
know for families with children it's
it's a challenge but people must we're
you know every stage respect these
guidelines because that's the only way
of making sure that we restrict the
spread of the disease and of course
there there are provisions and placed
legal provisions in place if people
deliberately flanked these guidelines
the police have instructions to engage
to explain to encourage and if necessary
to enforce the rules but it's it's vital
that all of us recognize that if we
weigh up an hour or two outside and wait
against the the lives of those we love
and the lives of those on the NHS front
line then it should be clear I hope to
all that we should follow the advice
Steve so my colleagues my friends
working in the NHS in the frontline
would absolutely plea to every member of
the public to follow the instructions
that they have been provided with their
safety their lives depends upon that and
of course beyond the NHS
it's the lives and the health of all of
us our friends our relatives your
friends your relatives that depend upon
us following these instructions and we
know it can work we absolutely know that
this can work and so as I've said many
times before this is everybody's chance
to save a life to ensure that a
ventilator that might have been used
isn't used and we need to stick with
this it's tough it's hard it's hard for
everybody I realize that but this is the
time that we need to make sure that we
don't we stick to that guidance and we
don't deviate from it is there anything
more that you wanted to follow up on
Riya thank you thank you
next we go to powered ghosh from the BBC
palette Mr Gove do you have any make any
indication so far as to whether people
are following the government instruction
to stay indoors so far this Saturday and
I'd also like to ask Stephen Paulus
whether we should take any heart
whatsoever from the flattening of
hospital admissions in some parts the
country notably London and the the
Midlands and also to elaborate on
comments made by Neil Ferguson again
that if we do follow the current
restrictions then perhaps by the end of
May some of the severe restrictions
could be substituted by less intensive
ones based on testing and technology
what did he mean by that
thank you very much Pam my impression is
that people are adhering to the social
distancing guidelines but I also
recognize that the temptation is there
Steve said when the Sun is out there's a
temptation to be out oneself but the
indications that we have so far are the
people are observing them and they're
doing so because the overwhelming
majority of people are public spirited
and they want to play their part
Steve so every country in the world will
have to work out its strategy for
managing this new virus and as I always
say remember this is a virus that until
a few months ago we didn't know existed
and wasn't in the human
population and we are learning about
this virus all the time and the
scientific evidence of how the virus is
transmitted how it affects immunity will
become more and more clear over the next
few months so yes we will have to
develop a strategy for coping with this
virus as will all countries but it's a
bit too early yet to say exactly what
that strategy will be the imperative at
the moment is to get on top of it and to
reduce transmission so I'm absolutely
sure that the advice the scientific
evidence will help those chief
scientific adviser the scientific
advisory group for emergencies to
formulate the best possible possible
advice to the government going forward
but on this day at this moment in time
the critical objective is to stop the
spread of the virus by reducing our
contact with each other and maintaining
social distance and it's only if we do
that and only if we are successful in
doing that that we can actually have the
conversations about what the next steps
are is there anything more that you'd
like to ask me palpable I'd like just
like to follow up with Stephen but on
the whether we should take any heart
from the flattening off of hospital
admissions I know it's early days but
can we read that some of the early major
apologies for not addressing very so so
as I described when when we showed you
the charts and as I've said before a
reduction in transmission so spread in
the community and there is some evidence
that the measures that have been put in
place
everybody's compliance with them is
reducing transmission will over a number
of days and weeks start to be reflected
the benefit will be reflected first in a
reduction in infections then in a
reduction in hospitalization and then
finally in a reduction in deaths so yes
that there is reason to be hopeful that
some of the changes that we are
serving in infections and perhaps in
hospitalizations is now reflecting the
benefit of the social distancing that
everybody is complying with but it will
still take time for that to have its
maximum effect and this is not just
about something we did two weeks ago or
a week ago this is something that we
have to do now and in the days and weeks
ahead because if we if we somehow decide
that we need to take our foot off the
pedal is somehow we think that this is
something through for the days past and
not not the days ahead in the next week
or two then those charts will start to
go in the wrong direction again so so
the clear message and it is a broken
record I'm afraid from both of us but
the strategy at the moment the
imperative at the moment is to maintain
social distancing stay at home reduce
contacts stop the spread of the virus
and then we will progressively see the
benefit of those actions thank you thank
you very much Devo turn now to Tom
Rayner from sky thank you a question
first for mr. powers 13 residents of the
Burlington Court care home in Glasgow
have died in the last seven days they
are suspected of having contracted Cove
aid 19 but have not been tested because
they weren't in hospital how much higher
do you think the death figures could be
in the UK than what we are seeing in the
official statistics because their deaths
will not be in the numbers that we have
set out today and for Mr Gove if I'm a
million million new claims have been
made to Universal Credit just in the
last few days it is a system designed to
encourage people into work but it does
that by incentivizing work rather than
relying on the benefit but when the vast
majority of these new claimants are
going to be unable to seek work is it
right the Universal Credit be made more
generous I'll hand over to Steve first
of all to deal with your direct question
about social care and then I'll come
back on universal credit so with great
sadness and
clearly they're to happen in the
community and those are people who do
not go to hospital and therefore do not
pass away in hospital so the figures
that we report from the NHS are the
figures for deaths in hospitals the
office for national statistics is able
to report on deaths that occur in the
community through the death registration
process and in the last week they have
started to do that so yes I would expect
that deaths will be higher than the
number that are reported from hospitals
but I think it will only be in the days
and weeks ahead as that data starts to
come through from ons that we will be
able to answer the question that you've
you've asked this disease does not
discriminate or this virus does not
discriminate it affects everybody in all
settings unfortunately of all ages and
therefore as I've said I do think sadly
that we will continue to see the high
number of deaths we've seen at the
moment but as we start to get control of
this through social distancing in a few
weeks that will start to fall and on
universal credit Tom you're absolutely
right the universal credit is designed
to support people in work and to help
people to find work and designed to
incentivize work but we're living as you
acknowledge through unprecedented
economic times and Universal Credit is
the means by which we're giving support
to those who need it most
it's not the only means however that the
government is deploying as you'll be
aware there are up to 1.5 million people
in the most vulnerable category the
shielded are vulnerable who we are
distributing food and prescription
medicines to and it's also the case that
a new task force led by George Eustace
and by the food and farming Minister
Victoria Prentiss are working with local
authorities and charities and others to
identify other people who are vulnerable
who lack social networks or who lack
resources in order to make sure that
they can get the support that they need
but of course we keep the the whole
welfare system under review in order to
ensure that we can support people
financially through a difficult time
is there anything that you wanted to
come back on just on that point Mr Gove
your colleague Matt Hancock the health
secretary acknowledged that he couldn't
live on 94 pounds a week the statutory
sick pay universal credit has been made
more generous by the government but only
by 20 pounds a week bringing it in line
with statutory sick pay
do you believe that that is acceptable
when you have millions of people many of
whom will have been in full-time work
paying their taxes that that is now the
level that the government can support
them at or given that these are
exceptional times would you consider
making the system more generous I think
we have to consider the the nature of
the system and whether or not we do need
to ensure that we better support the
vulnerable we keep that constantly under
review I think it's important that we do
recognize that this is a a very very
difficult economic time for very many
yeah I'll hand over to Ben Kentish from
LBC no sorry Ben hi I know that you're
asking a question but the audio here in
our press conference room isn't picking
up what you're saying I don't know if
there's a technical problem you hear me
now yes we can Ben sorry all right thank
you Mr Gove everybody watching this will
be wondering the same thing that is how
and when this lockdown will end you've
said before understandably it's too
early to say when but I wondered if you
could help us with the how professor
powers just said there it's almost too
early to say what the exit strategy will
be can you reassure people because that
will worry them that the government does
have a plan an exit strategy as it were
to lift this lockdown while also
containing the virus and just
specifically a couple of very quick
questions to the professor powers
firstly it's been it's been said a lot
that some of the experts advising the
government believe that herd immunity
while not the strategy is ultimately
inevitable that we simply won't be able
to stop most people in this country
getting coronavirus all we can do is
spread that out to ease the burden on
the NHS can you level people with people
today and say that is the case that most
of us will get
at some point or do you believe that not
to be the case and very specifically
there's been some early evidence from
other countries that treating
coronavirus patients with blood plasma
with antibodies or people who have
recovered from the illness can have a
significant benefit is that something
the NHS is looking at and will you be
asking people have recovered to donate
blood thank you thanks Ben um on your
specific point about when the the
current restrictions will end it depends
on our own compliance I mean one of the
points that Niall Ferguson was making
earlier today one of the points that
Steve and I have been seeking to make
today as well is that the more effective
that people comply with what we
acknowledge are very stringent
conditions the more that we can slow the
spread of the disease the more resilient
the NHS can be the more that we can move
to a different phase in due course but
it does rely on people observing that so
there's no fixed point no specific date
in the calendar at which we can say that
things will change we're keeping them
under review the prime minister said
that the the current lockdown proposals
will be reviewed in what is just over a
week's time but we need people to comply
now
the other thing that I would say is that
as as Steve I'm sure will say more about
we're dealing with a wholly new virus
we're dealing with a new virus whose
spread and whose capacity to cause death
are unlike those that we've seen
specifically before and therefore we
need to be certain that in every area
where we can fight this virus we are
improving our capacity and making sure
that we have the flexibility needed as
we move to a different phase to have all
the tools ready in order to fight it and
those tools will include of course not
just some of the treatments which are
undergoing clinical trial at the moment
but also some of the vaccines that we
are seeking to collaborate with other
countries to develop worldwide and also
making sure that the NHS itself has the
resilience required to deal with more
cases in the future
Steve yay so I don't particularly like
the term exit strategy I think we should
think much more of how we are going to
manage this virus over
next month because it is very likely
that this virus will become established
in populations throughout the world and
so we need a strategy to manage this
over time not just in the next few weeks
or the next few months and as I said
earlier all countries will be thinking
and working together on what that
strategy must be secondly as Michel has
said and I've said scientific knowledge
about this virus is still being
discovered we we're still in the early
stages and as we learn more about it as
the scientific evidence builds then that
will allow those strategies to evolve so
immunity is one part of a viral
infection and an epidemic but it's not
the only part of it as you've just heard
successful drug approaches and we are
recruiting people into clinical trials
the use of vaccines are all important
parts of strategies to manage any
infection and as we learn more about
effective drug treatments as we see
vaccines coming up in the future
they are all important components of how
in totality you manage an infection and
if we look at back at past infections so
if you go back what forty years ago to
HIV and AIDS a different sort of
infection coming into the population but
over time strategies were developed to
manage that infection so we can manage
infections through various strategies of
which immunity is one part and I should
say as I've said before one of the
important things when it comes to
immunity that we still need to learn
because it is too early in this in this
epidemic and pandemic to learn this is
what sort of immunity is generated in
people how long that immunity lasts and
Maddie will all be important information
as we develop strategies in the months
to come thank you very much anything all
you wanted to ask me Beth
I just come back on that specific point
you talked about there about the manage
managing the illness the question was
about whether you therefore expect most
people to get it I'd be grateful if you
could just say no
if we're managing it rather than
stopping it is it the case that at some
point most people in the UK will get
this virus because it depends upon all
those things that I have I've talked
about so it depends upon effective drug
treatments it depends upon effective
vaccine strategy so so it's not trying
to avoid the question at all it's simply
to say that it we are too early on in a
virus that three months ago we knew
nothing about didn't know was in the
human population to answer those
questions so so I don't want anybody to
get the impression this is the avoidance
of questions this is the reality of
learning about a new virus and a new
disease
thank you very much deep will turn out
to Dave wooden David wedding rather on
from the Sun on Sunday David good
afternoon
we've had some reporters down at the o2
and Chessington following the excellent
good news announcement by calling the
health sector this week that a hundred
thousand tests per day will be carried
out later in the year we found lots of
problems with bureaucracy people are
turning up and leaving untested NHS
nurses are in tears because they only
need an email or they need identity or
an appointment what can you do to cut
through this red tape because there's no
point in bringing in extra tests if
people can't be tested in the system
that's in place if I may throw in a
quick one - we've heard today of 5g
masts being burned down by people who
have read false rumors on social media
that these masks are in some way
responsible for spraying the virus can
you please debunk that myth for us
please and explain what damage these
people are doing to communication at a
very difficult time for this country
thank you very much David I'm on the
first point I'm very grateful to to
boots and to others who've played a role
in making sure that we can have
drive-through testing in chessington in
the o2 Centre and in other sites it is
there specifically for NHS workers and
the aim was to make sure that only
HS workers had access to it but if it's
as your reporters have discovered being
enforced in a bureaucratic fashion then
I will talk to Matt immediately after
this press conference and we'll make
sure working with the the boot team and
others that those who need those tests
get those tests and thank you for that
reporting because it's precisely that
sort of investigative work that makes
sure that we we can when we encounter
problems and bureaucracy try to cut
through the red tape so we we will do
that and we will report back tomorrow or
at Monday's press conference and any
progress that we've made on the point
about the 5g masts thank you again for
mentioning this story that I have got
about that they play a role in the in
the spread of the disease that's just
nonsense dangerous nonsense as well and
I'm hand over to Steve to say a little
bit more about the vital importance of
knocking down this rubbish yes so the
five G story is complete and utter
rubbish it's nonsense it's the worst
kind of fake news the reality is that
the mobile phone networks are absolutely
critical to all of us particularly in a
time when we are asking people to stay
at home and to not see relatives and
friends but in particular those are also
the phone networks that are used by our
emergency services and our health
workers and I'm absolutely outraged
absolutely disgusted that people would
be taking action against the very
infrastructure that we need to respond
to this health emergency it is absolute
and utter rubbish and I can't condemn it
in stronger terms than that on the
testing the good news is we said that we
would ramp up staff testing we're
actually testing staff not just through
those drive-through places that you have
seen all those drive-thru facilities but
also in spare capacity in our NHS
laboratories as well and I'm pleased to
say that yesterday we tested over 2,000
NH staff NHS staff in the capacity we
had in our NHS laboratories that 16%
rise on the day before 34 percent on the
day before that and the latest data
shows over 4,000 staff have been tested
in those drive-through facility so we
are increasing
staff testing all the time which is
really important so that we're staff
although although household members
don't have coronavirus they can come
back to work and assist with the
pressure that is clearly building on the
NHS at the moment thank you to you
anything more that you want to do to ask
David no that's fine you've covered my
points well thank you thank you very
much David thank you I will turn to
David Maddox of the Sunday Express now
good afternoon to begin with could you
give us any indication as to why the
numbers of infection rates appear to
have jumped up so quickly in the
Midlands and for northeast and Yorkshire
also a question for Michael Gove on the
helpful people were self-employed in
particular is there any possibility that
this could be reviewed given that people
who have company directorship so it
often don't get much money from those
company don't ships on they're blocked
from having any of that help and finally
in terms of exit strategy and sorry to
use that term professor powers but do
you have an infection rate in mind as to
when the lockdown measures social
distancing measures may be scaled back
thank you David I'll take the second
question and the hand the first and the
third over to Steve the the package that
we put in place in order to support the
self-employed and also to support
workers and the economy overall has been
designed in order to help those
principally on
lower incomes in order to help them
through a difficult time it's be
consigned specifically targeted in order
to do that but as we've seen in the
course of this week the Treasury are
keeping these schemes under review and
are doing everything they can working
with the banks and others in order to
help support viable businesses to keep
people in employment and to put the
government's hands around every working
person so if there are specific examples
of in inefficiencies in the way in which
the Business Support Scheme or support
for the self-employed is operating that
I know that the Treasury will want to
look at them in order to make sure that
support is targeted as effectively as
possible but I'll hand over to decieve
on the question about the regional
spread and also about how we manage our
way out of the current situation so on
the geographical variation I think it's
difficult to give a particular
explanation as to why any particular
part of the country has a higher rate at
any one time I would say that perhaps
not unsurprising London as a major urban
center has an infection rate which is
maybe a week or so ahead of the rest of
the country but but for instance if you
look at a normal winter and look at the
spread of flu in a normal winter it's
not unusual to see flu rates in the
winter pop up in one area of the country
before they rise in another area so that
that geographical variation is actually
to be expected although as I say it's
difficult to get under the skin of why
one particular area versus another might
have a higher rate at any particular
time so not unexpected on the infection
rate per se no I don't have a particular
figure for infection rate and and I
think it allows me to highlight one of
the bits of scientific information one
of the pieces of the jigsaw that I've
been talking about earlier that we don't
know about yet but which will help us
when we develop strategies going forward
so we are still not clear how many
people might have had this virus but
have not developed symptoms that is work
that's going on internationally and in
fact it's work that's going on in this
country as I speak to try and understand
what that figure is when that
information becomes available when that
scientist
knowledge is known with large numbers of
people that will help us not only in our
strategy going forward but in our
understanding of infection rates per se
thanks very much is there anything you
just wanted clarity on there David are
you putting more weight on infection
rates or hospital admissions in terms of
your strategy oh well I think the
strategy has been quite clear it
continues to be the strategy strategies
to save lives to protect the NHS save
lives because clearly we wish to save
lives as a doctor that's why I went into
medicine of course we'd be to save lives
but putting say putting putting less
pressure on the NHS is important for a
number of reasons firstly as I've said
before our strategy is to be to build
capacity in the NHS so at the same time
as we are reducing the spread of the
virus by the measures that the
government have put in place and we all
must follow so reducing demand we have
worked hard to make sure that we're
ahead of the curve and we have increased
capacity and you've heard about the
nightingale hospital and more
Nightingale hospitals today so we still
have capacity within the NHS even in
London we are ahead of this surge and I
think that's down to the huge efforts
that the NHS has put in so going forward
the strategy will need to be to continue
to make sure that the NHS can cope with
this and that we save lives so those are
the two pillars of the strategy going
forward thank you and we'll turn now to
Michael Savage from The Observer I thank
you first the Secretary of State on
compliance you mentioned in your
introduction about young people using
social media to reach them do you have
demographic data suggesting there being
less compliant at the moment compared to
other demographic groups and and also
we're two weeks into this now you're
having to work very very hard to implore
the public to stay home what other
methods could the government call upon
when we're months into this rather than
weeks to ensure compliance continues and
to Professor powers if I could question
on Ben
halation Neil Ferguson says we might
reach a peak in seven to ten days
according to our models how many
ventilators will we need at that point
and how many do we think we will have
thank you thank you very much Michael um
the evidence does suggest that
compliance does vary across different
sections of the population and there is
evidence there has been evidence to
suggest that for some young people
there's been a lower level of compliance
and that's why it's important that we we
reach them appropriately it may be that
some of the the messages and some of the
channels that we've used have not
reached some sections of the population
it may be that younger people feel that
they're less likely to be affected and
less likely to be infected one of the
reasons therefore for trying to make
sure that our message is consistent is
that for some you may hear this message
again and again and again and think well
the government is as Steve mentioned
know they're sounding like a crack
record so there'll be many who won't
have access or don't access traditional
media and we need to make sure that we
get the message through to them the
evidence is that people appreciate why
it's important people appreciate the you
know the the the ethical reasons why
self-restraint can help others at a time
like this and it's because people are
building up that that broad social
understanding they're unconfident that
we we can work with the british people
to ensure that over the weeks for as
long as it takes that we exercise the
the the self-discipline required in
order to beat this virus but you are
right in the implication of your
question it is tough and I particularly
appreciate that it is tough for families
it is tough for those in economically
vulnerable positions and that's why the
government is always looking at ways in
which we can help those by making sure
that we're alive to the pressures that
they face I'll hand over to to Steve on
a ventilator capacity but one of the
things I would say as I emphasized here
is that the more that people observe the
social distancing guidelines the more
time we barley the NHS and the more
ventilator capacity non-invasive and
invasive we
insecure and that has to be Ari yeah so
that's exactly right and as I said it
Lancer the previous question the NHS
strategy has been to constantly build
capacity so that we stay ahead of the
demand as Michael has said we need to
reduce the demand we're doing that
through social distancing and staying at
home but we have planned over the last
few months to stay ahead of capacity so
I won't give you a number in terms of
our aim for ventilators but I will say
that we are constantly looking to
procure ventilators and the call to arms
for British industry is also aiding and
getting ventilators from sources that we
didn't have before and Michael has
mentioned non-invasive ventilation so
that is ways of ventilating to providing
oxygen support to people where you don't
have to put a tube down into the lungs
and down into the windpipe to do that
that's invasive or mechanical
ventilation and we are learning all the
time not least through international
collaboration as to how non-invasive
ventilation might be used so the overall
strategy is to keep our ventilation
capacity and our critical care
facilities ahead of the of the demand
and and we have successfully done that
so far
and if we all comply with the measures
that are put in place that have been put
in place then that gives us a very best
chance that the demand never exceeds the
capacity and one final thing I'd say
about capacity so I think it's important
that everybody realizes that although we
are focusing on increasing capacity to
deal with the coronavirus the NHS is
still working as it always does for
people with other health emergencies so
it's really important that at this time
when there's a focus on kovat 19 that if
you have symptoms of a stroke that if
you have symptoms of a heart attack or
any other emergency that you are
contacting the NHS and the health
services as normal because the NHS is
focusing as hard on people with other
conditions other emergency conditions as
it is on coronavirus and it's important
that we do both of those at the same
time
that has been our strategy and will
continue to be our strategy thank you
very much deep anything you wanted to
follow up on with me Michael or could I
just ask quickly whether your
introductory remarks about ventilation
change the underlying numbers that is
broadly that we have just over 8,000
ventilators and 8,000 on order I think
it's important to stress that we have
more than 8,000 ventilators in the NHS
now and we want to increase capacity
well above the 8,000 additional that has
been cited and we want to be in a
position where we have the highest level
of ventilation capacity possible which
is why we are as I mentioned earlier not
only producing non-invasive ventilators
with the help of UCL and mercedes-benz
but also high pen LAN Smith's die
America and other companies are also
working with us it's also why we're
sourcing ventilation capacity from
Germany from Switzerland from China and
elsewhere with that I just want to say
thank you to to Steve and to all the
staff in the NHS and today thank you to
our colleagues in the media and there'll
be another press briefing of course
tomorrow thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News